With the doctor, you paid 50 cents every two weeks
per family, and that took care of all the medical
services. No, that wouldn't take care of the
medicine. They had to pay the drugs, too, you know.
Yeah, but the doctor, he'd get that 50 cents from
each family. That was understood among the
Mexicans, too, you know, that when payday came,
you got to pay that 50 cents for the doctor, so much
for the drugs. The
bookkeeper would take that right off of their
paycheck. Who was the bookkeeper? Theodore
Walter. Theodore Walter? W-A-L-T-E-R. And was he
at the commissary? No, he did live over here on
the... When you come out here, the last house, you
know, not the last house is on this side, where the
road goes that way. That goes to Cabot Ridge. And he
lived right behind those woods over there, down
the road a little piece. I see. And he would come in
every two weeks and fix the books, you know, and
they'd go to 7-1 to go to town in the buggy and get the
money, you know. So they paid you and the Mexicans
in cash? Yeah, cash, yeah. He'd go to that money,
get the money that he would then pay off, you know,
at the cumbersome, you know, or eat at Grandma's
house. Like I've been telling them, every two
weeks he'd go to town to get the payroll, five, six
hundred dollars, and nobody didn't rob him one
time. you know, all the time, all them years. But I
bet these days he couldn't do it in a horse and
buggy. He would get outside the city and somebody
robbed him. Oh, my gosh. That is incredible. That
there were no robberies. Yeah, not at all. You
know, the Mexicans all knew it. You'd go to town
every other week. You didn't get that payroll
file, $600. So the Mexicans would go to Rockville
to pick up their money? No. Walter... the
bookkeeper, he'd go down and get the money from the
bank on the side of this and pay off that even out
there at the commissary, you know, at the store,
yeah, pay off, yeah. And then would the Mexicans
come into town to spend their money? Yeah, they
spent some, yeah. I see. Do you remember any, you
know, anecdotal stories you know, about the
mines, anything that you, when you're just
sitting down sometime and thinking about mining?
They like, the Mexicans like to drink a lot, you
know. They'd come home from town drunk off a hoop in
the holland, you know. What would they drink,
Muslim? Was it beer or whiskey? I don't know.
They'd hoot from holland, they'd get too bad, then
Grandma would, you know, They called her mama,
grandmother. Grandma Vogel? Uh-huh. Called her
mama. She was brought to camp, you know, in the
house. She ran the camp then. Uh-huh. She owned the
house. Well, the mines too long, you know, they
were hard too. Did they like Grandma Vogel? Yeah,
they liked her. She told them they used to behave,
you know. She'd tell them to behave, and they'd
say, Mama, I'm sorry. I'm not going to do it no more.
I'm not going to do it no more. Next Saturday, come
along and get drunk again. But that's natural.
They do that these days, too. Would you like to come
and sit down here? Oh, I want to do something first.
OK. Grandpa Vogel, he did that camp out there. He
put up a dance hall. He figured it would have
entertainment, you know? Mm-hmm. They had one
dance, the first night they had a dance, they had a
big fight and a bunch of men got cut up, you know. He
said if they couldn't behave themselves, they
don't need no entertainment, so no more dances.
You had one dance at the dance hall? Yeah, this one.
He tore down after all. He said if they couldn't
behave themselves, he didn't want that kind of
doings, you know. So he finally tore it down again.
They had a big two-story building there. They call
it the boarding house. He had that dance hall built
around here, and he could sit around it, you know,
and dance in the middle. Yeah, one day, the first
night, a bunch of messengers got drunk, you know,
they cut the university and used a knife and all
that, you know. Do you remember about what year
this was? I don't remember. I guess I'm old enough
to remember, but he said no more. Yeah, you was too
young those days. Yeah, I was too young then. I was
born in 1900. See, I'll be 77 years old in December
21st. December 21st, 1900 when I was born. That's a
long time. And I remember Grandpa died, I
remember. That was about what time? I don't
remember what year. Grandpa, see, he fell. They
dig a shaft, you know, and he fell down there one
day, you know. He said, I guess, you know, and he
died. Grandpa did, yeah. Grandpa Vogel. Yes.
Do you remember the great flood of the early 1920s
when Rockville inundated with all this rain? I
don't remember. I don't believe. In 1930, I guess
it did. Well, how did the Depression affect you? Do
you remember how the Depression affected the
mines? You mean 1930? Right. Well, they didn't
have no more mines then. The mines quit in 1917, the
mines. They didn't have no more mines then. In
1917, the mines all quit out here. All but one, a
Spanish... A full 100-hour mine. Dr. Sprott had a
mine yet later on, but they, mines, 1930, mines was
all equipped. We lived out here over 19, we moved
out here in 1919. The mines were all played out by
then.
No, they couldn't sell enough lignite then when
they got that oil, you know. In the end, they used
lignite, and when they got the boomer, they
started to gush it down on them. Then they started
using the oil and gas because they were cheaper,
you know, and cleaner. They quit using lignite, so
they had to quit. Now, now, oil is so hard, you know,
they could use lignite to get, you know. I go to A&M
College. Right. Right. And they quit, too, then,
you know. They said oil was cheaper, and they quit
buying it. So, Daddy said, you know, he was trying
to... If you go out to Henry, McCurtain's brown
boy, you know, he might take you out and show you
around, you know, if he got time. Somebody, he
wasn't here before, no. No, that was Julio. What?
That was Julio. Somebody else, you know, said the
brown boy took him out there and showed him around,
you know. See, he owns all that old rich amount. He
went for the railroad, so you might not catch him in
town during the week. Mostly on Sundays. He's at
home some days. I don't know. Well, I'll be here for
a couple weeks. You can find out. If you go out
there, his...
But that, we talk too much? Oh, no, no. I just wanted
to get it back to the starting place. I wanted you to
tell me about the malaria of my... Oh. Well, we told
you we had to cut the doctor. And we'd have malaria,
fever. Some of us in our family would too,
Mexicans. And we'd get the doctor to come out. And
everybody paid their dues. So how would you catch
malaria out of mines? I don't know. Those little
holes, you know, had too much water in them, you
know. The mosquitoes were thick, you know. Yeah,
the mosquitoes. Did you grow up at the mines,
Cassidy? We was all born out there but the baby
sister. 1908, I see. But you never went down in the
mine? Yeah, I went down. Oh, you did? We did too one
time, we girls. He just went with that, you know. He
had to go down there. He used to look around. He
called it. He used to go down there and look. He'd
survey down there, you know, surveyed with a
compass and what you call those tapes, you know,
with the numbers. What do you call them? Tape
lines. Tape lines. And, you know, I'd help him
sometimes, you know. You know, carry the end of the
tape line, you know, he'd measure the length, you
know, and he'd write it down, you know. You did that
with your father? Did you get paid for that? Did you
ever go down in the mine to work to get paid?
They loaded a box called one of these bricks, you
know. We had a brickyard out there, too. And I
decided to come out there. There was about a half a
brick right there. It hit me right on the top of the
head here. It all bled. It shot out. I have a finger
on that. I went home, you know. Did they make
bricks? Yeah, they had a brickyard, too. Do you
remember how they did that, how they made the
bricks? They had a press. They had a press that
pressed them. Crested bricks, yeah.
How big was the kiln? Eight
foot
size. Right.
Did this clay come right along with the lignite?
No, I think they made the clay. In the mines, there
also is a white, they call it white clay. They used
some of it. They made a clay pit on top of the ground,
stripped the sand off, you know, and got that red
clay and then that other below that. Yeah, they'd
make those fire clay. They call it fire clay, that
white clay. They had a thing kind of like you see,
those refrigerators they used to scrape with.
Kind of like a bulldozer. Right. They'd drag it
along behind the mule. But there's big drums that
go around it. There's wheels on there, you know.
And when they had it loaded, they'd make it where
it'd come up, you know what I mean? The load. It
closed up. You know what I mean? It'd rise there,
and the mules would pull it out, you know. I see. And
pull it to the press, you know. The mules would pull
it under the shed where they'd dump it. Press the
dump. Lay in for it to go to the press. Mm-hmm. Well,
did, once you all moved here, Gus, did you ever go
back out to the mines? Or did you pretty much forget
about them once you left the mines? No, I didn't go
out there. We'd go fishing.
It changed, though, it seemed like. If we go out
there now, it seemed like it changed a whole lot.
You know, it don't look like the right place, kind
of. Trees got big and, you know, and changed, you
know, kind of. Do you happen to remember the Texas
Coal Company mine site at all? Which one was the
Texas Coal Company, Gus? I don't think you know
that. What we're trying to do is to map that site.
They don't have maps of all the mines? Well, we do
have that, but we don't have an actual layout of the
camps. Oh. And like where your house was and all the
mines and where the commissary was and where all
the little Mexican towns were. Well, our house and
grandmother's was on the hill like. And it was kind
of slanted down, you know what I mean? Well, I tell
you what, the Mexican really sat on the highway,
you know, the Mexican houses. We lived right
across the river. And it comes down, it comes down
right at the Mexican houses there, right along in
there somewhere. I see. Really across the river.
And then...
It was a little old store right beside our house,
you know, in the camp, you know, in the camp. They
had three stores, I believe. I believe the Texas
mine was down there, Stripling's. I mean, on the
other side, the Texas mine was down there. On the
other side of our mine. I call that our mine because
that's grandmother's. Well, that's close
enough. Yeah. Do you remember anything else in
mind, sir, when you were a little kid?
Did you play with the Mexican children? No, pretty
much. Well, none of us ever played with the
Mexicans. See, like those days, it wasn't like
now. You know, they were separated. Now, lots of
the grown boys would play baseball with the
Mexicans. Yeah, yeah, play sometimes. You had a
big baseball field there, and they'd play
baseball there. Did you play baseball? Sure. What
position did you play? Oh, it was like the first
base. All right. Not that far to run the dugout, is
it? Willie, did you play baseball? I played some. I
never did like the back catch, you know. It wasn't
my play. We girls played baseball, too, and we
could play pretty good, too. I tell you. I was like
the first baseman. We went to Tower Ridge School,
that's where we went to school. Right across the
railroad and you go over there, you see that
Mexican camp out there? You go straight up here,
you know where Tower Ridge is at. That's where we
went to school. All of us except, when we moved over
here, then the babysitter was born over here, and
she and Gus and several more of the other ones went
over here too. And after I was a young sister, I went
to Roger's school after all, you know. Three of
them graduated. I mean,
Brother Ernest and Sister Claire and Emmer, they
graduated up here at Roger's school. I guess you
were saying that it was pretty well separated
between the Mexicans and the Anglicans. Were
there any blacks that worked at the mine? At the
brickyard. It was funny that the niggers worked at
the brickyard and the Mexicans, they worked at the
mine. Not a nigger working in the mine. I don't
know. They wouldn't go down in there. They hung
around the brickyard at the nigger's wood. You
never did ask them why they wouldn't go down to the
mine? Was it more money at the brickyard? No, I
don't believe. About the same? They sprayed her
just to go down there. Well,
I think I would be, too. That is funny, you know, a
human being. You know, some places, they go down
into the deep, you know, and you crawl way up from
here to up by that nigger house up there, you know.
And all that dirt on top of you, what if that door
falls? Right, yeah. I have it. We did have two
boiler explosions out back of mine. One. One, I
mean, one. Do you remember what year that was,
Louise? What year that boiler exploded? That was
1900.
Must have been 10 or 12, huh? No, it was late in that.
13 or 14? Because we had that other mine, the last
mine was up there, that shell mine. Do you remember
that cave-in? Uh-huh. That mine where they were—
That was the same mine where they brought the
exposed, where it caved in. It's still there. It's
holding water now. Is it? Do you all remember that?
Did you go down to the cave-in? Uh-huh. Did you— We
were going to school then, yeah. And whenever it
would rain a whole lot, you know, we had to walk to
school. And it was about three miles to school. And
we had to walk, carry our own lunch baskets and
satchel full of books and things, you know. We were
loaded down. Well, with that cave being in 1913,
did you all go out there? You would have been 13
years old, and Gus would have been five. Did you go
out there and help dig them out? No, not me. I didn't
work there. I wasn't old enough. Do you remember
that scene? I was going to school, yeah. And when it
rained a whole lot, my mother would send one of the
workers, the white men and all, Send them with a
wagon and a team and raincoats and umbrellas and
things. Send them to school after us kids. And
that's just when it happened. We were all in
school.
The time changed so much. Those days, all we had
was... a pencil and a pen. That's where we began,
you know. Right, you didn't have a fancy tape
recorder. And later on, when you get a little
older, you have to have some ink and an ink pen, you
know. These days, look what you have to have these
days to get it. Right. The school has changed.
Well, y'all went to your own school then. You
didn't go to school with the Mexicans? No, no. That
was all separate. Did you like going to the school
guys? Yeah, I liked it when I got older.
Yeah, Willie and I were talking a few moments ago.
Willie Holtzholdt. Remember Willie Holtzholdt?
Holtzholdt, yeah, I'm sorry. And he played hooky
so much. Yeah. He'd go with us to where he kept
halfway away. There's a big place with woods on
each side of the road, you know. And he'd go to the
van. He'd say, all right, I'll see y'all this
evening when y'all come back. And he'd go in those
woods and stay in there until we'd come back home
from school. And when we got there, he'd be there
waiting for us. And he'd walk home with us so nobody
knew he didn't go to school, you know. But I believe
he had a sister go to school, and she's older. And I
think she told her daddy about him. And her daddy
gave him a good whipping. Some mornings he had to
take them to school halfway, you know. to make them
go. Well, Gus, what do you think? Don't tell him we
told all of us. Okay, I won't. I won't tell him. He
may not have told you himself. Yeah, he told me
himself. Don't like to be in the middle of it. He
talked about time, the one time at the store, and I
said, at the city food market, I said, we used to go
to school to get them. He said, yes, Willie learned
something, but I didn't. I played hooky every day.
He said, Willie learned something, learned how to
write and read. I can't even write my own name, he
said. I told him. Gus, what did you think when your
older brother went down into the mines? Do you
remember that?
He don't remember. He wasn't just old enough yet.
Do you remember how much you were getting paid back
then when you were working in the mine? I don't
remember nothing now. When you worked in the mine,
you got paid by them little cars you filled. I was
wondering if you remembered how much it was per
farm. If you wouldn't fill but one, you wouldn't
make much. Right. Some would be good diggers, and
some wouldn't. They'd come out of there early, and
some would stay until... They wouldn't work on the
Saturday, just couldn't get no biscuits and work
on the Saturday, just... Well, they could get all
the coal they wanted anyway, you know, usually.
They had to buy the mines ore, too, you know. They
wouldn't work on the city unless they'd get
behind, you know, neat coal, extra, you know. They
had a switch running from the highway right there
that's running out there now. They had a switch
from there on going out to the mines. And every
day... When they had some cars loaded, they'd call
it in, you know, out to town, and the trains, they
had a special train. They would come out to the
mine? They'd come out there and go out there and
they'd switch and get those cars of coal out of
there. He'd bring the empties, you know, and take
the fumes back to town. He'd go to every mine, you
know, out there the same day, you know, yeah. Do you
remember when the trucks came out to the mines?
Trucks. Trucks. Did they ever use trucks? No,
there wasn't no cars until... I think my Uncle
Herman had the first car.
That's Herman Vogel, right? Uh-huh. 1915, I
think, or 16. That's when cars started coming in,
you know. And he had one, a beauty. They went to town
one night... coming home and there was an old mule
standing in the road. He thought the mule would
move and the mule, I guess, just stood there and he
ran into him and the mule kicked and kicked the
radiator, horn of the radiator. So he had to get
that fixed up. Yeah, yeah. He said, I slowed up but
the mule wouldn't move, he said.
Well, do you know what's happened to the Mexican
families? There's some still living. Yeah, I
talked to a couple of them this morning. I'm going
to go back and we're going to do the same thing. He
talked to a real old lady out there. A real old lady.
She might have moved to town by now. Mr. Potter died
here a month or two ago. But she's got sons. What do
you mean? Not that an old lady didn't die. There's
another old lady. I forget what her name is. But
always come out and ask about Mama, that real old
lady. She didn't die. They come out here? Louise.
Uh-uh. She didn't die because I talked to her
before yesterday. The other old lady died. They
come out. We grow vegetables and sell them, you
know. Oh, you still do that? Uh-uh.
Gus raises plants. Some of them come out here and
get plants. These old Mexican women would come out
here and buy plants. And they're just, oh, they're
just glad to see you. They just shake hands and
talk. They were very friendly. Ruth ordained
them. I lived in town and I'd meet up with one of
those old Mexican men that worked in the mine. He
didn't know me. He'd come there and shake hands
with me and ask me how Mama was and how Papa was and
how Mata was. Asked her all about the family, you
know. They were real friendly.
If you ever get more mad at you, you just better look
out. He might as well stick you with a knife or
something. They was bad on you tonight when they
get mad. They use a knife more than a gun. They take a
knife. You never had a run in, was it? You never had a
run in.
Do you think the lignite mining was good for
Rockville? Yeah, it helped. Gave more work to do.
What do you think about Shell Oil coming in here
now? There'll be a lot more people coming in.
They're sure building up some new homes all around
in Westwood and different places. We went, I met
you from down Baytown, because I feel anxious. So I
decided to build a dance hall, you know, a dance
hall for the Mexicans, you know. So they'd have
some fun too, you know. And he built a brand new one.
And the first dance, one of them was getting mad
with the other that danced with his wife or
something, you know. And they started cutting up
each other. And Papa said, where are you? If y'all
want to do that, I just tag back down. He tore it back
down. And that was Papa Lorraine? No, that was
Grandpa. That was Grandpa. He said, well, if y'all
want to fight and kill each other, I just tag back
down. He tore it back down. They said one day. One
day. They had weddings out there, too. And I tell
you, when they have a wedding, they have a wedding.
They first get married by the Justice of the Peace.
Would the Justice of the Peace come out to the
mining camp? I guess if they wanted him to, but I
believe they always went to town. They'd get
married at Justice of the Peace, and that night
they'd have a
big doing. They'd dance, and... They'd always
invite Grandma Vogel and Mother and Daddy in if
they wanted to go. Did your parents, grandparents
go to those weddings? Yeah, I went too. They took us
older girls too along. Did you have a good time?
Well, we just watched. Just watched. But they'd
ask Mother and Grandma to dance if they wanted to
dance. And they'd let them dance first, you know,
and then later on the others would dance. And when
Sunday morning would come, they'd all dress up and
go to town, to church. They'd get married again.
And some of the women would stay at home and they'd
cook a big dinner, chicken and all kinds of, you
know, big dinner. And they'd cook them outside in
boiling pots. They'd cook out there in them, a big
old dinner. They'd bring, at their time, some
they'd bring grandmother a plateful of food, and
they'd bring us a plateful of food. Wow. That was
nice. Uh-huh. They liked the guitar a whole lot.
They liked the guitar. Did you ever learn how to
play it? No. I never could learn. We never did learn
how to play anything. Well, we wasn't able to take
the music. When they'd have their weddings
sometimes, they'd leave and they'd have what you
call game roosters, you know what I mean? Five game
roosters. Oh, yeah, game roosters. Yeah, and
they, on Sundays, they'd always have a fight. One
would take it to the other house and do a lot of, you
know, let's see what you can fight, you know, best,
you know, win, you know. So they'd raise their own
cocks? Yeah, yeah. I see. And sometimes they'd
tell him, he had a .22, you know what I mean? That
little rifle. Right. They'd have a wedding. They
wanted to kill him when them roosters came by. They
couldn't catch him, you know? So they'd tell him to
come down there and he'd shoot him with that little
rifle. They'd give him a dollar for every one of his
shoots, you know. Did you watch any of the cock
fights? What? Did you watch any? No, I never
watched any. We never did mingle among them at all.
Do you remember where they came from? Mexico.
How did your grandfather Vogel get a hold of them?
Sometimes they'd send some Mexicans from here to
Mexico to get workers, you know, give them money
enough to go down over there and get some, you know.
Your grandfather would trust them with the money
to go down there? I guess so. He'd go down and get
some and bring them back. The only way they paid
them first was after they got here. I don't know
what they've done now. But they did work this
thing. They'd bring the whole family along. In the
summertime, during cotton picking season, you
know, late summer and fall, the mines, they had to
pay a little more, you know, to dig coal. I remember
some of them asking quick, you know, Three or four
kids, you know, they said they could make more
money picking cotton, you know. They had to, in the
summer, pay a little more, raise the wages, you
know. So they started the mine. Some of them had
three or four kids, and they said they could make
more money to take the kids, the whole family,
picking cotton, you know. Yet they had to give a
little more during that sea of cotton-picking
time. They wouldn't all stay out there at one mine.
They'd change around. They'd move out, go to
another mine. Why would they do that, Louise?
Sometimes they'd owe money. They'd quickly leave
out, you know, someone. I see. So another mind
might pay more than your grandfather's mind.
Yeah, yeah. It's like we do these days. Yeah.
Somebody might pay you more if you go to work for the
other man too. It's the same way. One day they go to
work, you know, and there's like here, I guess
you'd call it burglar, ain't it? They took
sledgehammer stuff and Knocked all that brass
off, you know, off the machinery, pipes and stuff.
They had to close down for about two days before
they could go to work again. You know what I mean?
Yeah, that happened at Jeremiah's? At the
brickyard, yeah. At the brickyard, right.
Knocked that brass off, you know. Did your grandpa
have any labor problems? Were there ever any
strikes? No. I don't know. We didn't even know what
a strike was. No, they didn't have no strikes. They
didn't have no trouble. If the Mexican didn't like
it, they'd just quit and leave, you know. They'd
get some more, you know. They'd get some more. Like
I said, they'd sometimes need some workers, you
know.